@node term ansi-color, xml ssax, string wrap, Top
@chapter (term ansi-color) 

@cindex terminals, ANSI color codes for
@cindex ANSI color codes
@cindex color codes, ANSI

The @samp{(term ansi-color)} module generates @acronym{ANSI} escape
sequences for colors.  Two functions are exported by this module:

@defun color attr1 attr2 @dots{}
Returns a string containing the @acronym{ANSI} escape sequence for
producing the requested set of attributes. 

The allowed values for the attributes are listed below.  Unknown
attributes are ignored.
@end defun

@defun colorize-string str attr1 attr2 @dots{}
Returns a copy of @var{str} colorized using @acronym{ANSI} escape
sequences according to the attributes specified.  At the end of the
returned string, the color attributes will be reset such that
subsequent output will not have any colors in effect.  

The allowed values for the attributes are listed below.  Unknown
attributes are ignored.
@end defun

The allowed attributes given to the above functions are all symbols.
The symbols recognized by this module are:

@table @asis
@item Reset Attributes
@samp{CLEAR} and @samp{RESET} are allowed and equivalent.

@item Non-Color Attributes
@samp{BOLD} makes text bold, and @samp{DARK} reverses this.
@samp{UNDERLINE} and @samp{UNDERSCORE} are equivalent.  @samp{BLINK}
makes the text blink.  @samp{REVERSE} invokes reverse video.
@samp{CONCEALED} hides output (as for getting passwords, etc.).

@item Foregrond Color Attributes
@samp{BLACK}, @samp{RED}, @samp{GREEN}, @samp{YELLOW}, @samp{BLUE},
@samp{MAGENTA}, @samp{CYAN}, @samp{WHITE}

@item Background Color Attributes
@samp{ON-BLACK}, @samp{ON-RED}, @samp{ON-GREEN}, @samp{ON-YELLOW},
@samp{ON-BLUE}, @samp{ON-MAGENTA}, @samp{ON-CYAN}, @samp{ON-WHITE}
@end table

Here is an example of the module's use:
@lisp
(use-modules (term ansi-color))

;; method one: safer, since you know the colors
;; will get reset
(display (colorize-string "Hello!\n" 'RED 'BOLD 'ON-BLUE))

;; method two: insert the colors by hand
(for-each display
          (list (color 'RED 'BOLD 'ON-BLUE)
                "Hello!"
                 (color 'RESET)))
@end lisp

@ignore
   arch-tag: fe239cc6-b491-4721-9bbb-086f2bf41049
@end ignore
